High up on the Tibetan Plateau, surrounding
the sacred summit of Mount Kailash,
the ridges and valleys are giving birth to the
headwaters of South Asia’s great rivers. Alongside
tributaries that feed the Brahmaputra and Ganges,
the meltwater from glaciated gullies give life to
the Indus River, which will then go on a journey
through the world’s tallest mountains, arid plains
and lush wetlands, supporting the livelihood of
hundreds of millions of people along the way.
Rushing down from the northern edge of the
Himalayas at over 5,500 meters in elevation,
headwaters of the Indus River have carved a
path along the
collision belt of the Indian and Eurasian
tectonic plates. Flowing northwest,
the Indus River steadily grows as glaciers
from giants like K2 and Nanga Parbat drain
into its valley. Winding through the disputed
Kashmir region, the Indus River eventually
hits the Karakoram Range and the Hindu Kush Mountains,
forcing the river's path towards the Indian Ocean.
As the rocky outcrops of Tibet give way to
the Pothohar Plateau and the river's elevation
drops to a mere 200 meters above sea level,
the 2.7 kilometer long Tarbela Dam suddenly
stands in its way. It holds back the river
in an enormous 50 kilometer long reservoir,
creating hydroelectric power and smoothing out
the annual fluctuation in discharge of the river.
Below the spillways, the course of the Indus
River reaches its second phase, entering Punjab,
the breadbowl of Pakistan. A compound word of
the Persian “Panj” and “Ab” meaning the “land
of 5 waters”, it describes the largest tributaries
of the Indus drainage basin that feed the main river.
Here, the Sutlej, whose drainage basin is separated
by only a single ridge on the Tibetan Plateau,
finally unites with the Indus.
Between these 5 tributaries,
the single largest interconnected irrigation
network of the planet has fueled an immense
irrigated landscape. Despite sitting on the
western fringe of the South Asian monsoon
corridor and therefore only receiving marginal
rainfall, dozens of major dams, hundreds of
canals and thousands of distributaries are fueling
agriculture, in an otherwise semi-arid landscape.
Today about 270 million people have built their
livelihood around this irrigation system, which
has not just transformed the central Pakistani
plain but also the river’s delta. After passing
the Thar Desert, the sediments of the Indus River
have built a 240 kilometer wide alluvial fan.
Back in the 19th century, mangrove forests
once buffered the coast from tidal swells and
storm surges and even grew through steady
sediment deposits. Since then however,
upstream water management has reduced the
freshwater and sediment reaching the sea,
and mangroves shrank from about 400,000 to only
50,000 hectares over the 20th century. Since the
1990s, restoration efforts have recovered some
area, but with less freshwater and silt arriving,
the delta faces erosion and saltwater
intrusion, and remains a vulnerable habitat.
If you want to learn more about the greatest rivers
of our planet, I have a full playlist here,
or watch what YouTube thinks is best for
you here. See you in the next one, cheers.